Restructuring Expressions (#697)
neo4j/docs-cypher: modules/ROOT/pages/queries/case.adoc

  (alice)-[:KNOWS]->(bob),
  (alice)-[:KNOWS]->(charlie),
  (bob)-[:KNOWS]->(daniel),
  (charlie)-[:KNOWS]->(daniel),
  (bob)-[:MARRIED]->(eskil)
----

[[case-simple]]
== Simple `CASE`

The simple `CASE` form is used to compare an expression against multiple values.
The expressions are evaluated by the `WHEN` operator until a `MATCH` is found.
If no match is found, the expression in the `ELSE` operator is returned.
If there is no `ELSE` case and no match is found, `null` will be returned.

[[case-simple-syntax]]
=== Syntax 

[source, syntax]
----
CASE test
  WHEN value THEN result
  [WHEN ...]
  [ELSE default]
END
----

*Arguments:*
[options="header"]
|===
| Name | Description

| `test`
| A valid expression.

| `value`
| An expression whose result will be compared to `test`.

| `result`
| This is the expression returned as output if `value` matches `test`.

| `default`
| If no match is found, `default` is returned.
|===

[[case-simple-examples]]
=== Example

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (n)
RETURN
CASE n.eyes
  WHEN 'blue'  THEN 1
  WHEN 'brown' THEN 2
  ELSE 3
END AS result
----

[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===

> | result

Reviewer: Would it make sense to return n.eyes as well so the table is easier to relate back to the query?

| 2
| 1
| 3
| 2
| 1
1+d|Rows: 5
|===

[[case-generic]]
== Generic `CASE`

The generic `CASE` expression enables the expression of multiple conditional statements.
Each row is evaluated in order and without any pre-evaluation until a `true` value is found.
If no match is found, the expression in the `ELSE` operator is returned.
If there is no `ELSE` case and no match is found, `null` will be returned

[[case-generic-syntax]]
=== Syntax

[source, syntax]
----
CASE
  WHEN predicate THEN result
  [WHEN ...]
  [ELSE default]
END
----

*Arguments:*
[options="header"]
|===
| Name | Description
| `predicate`

> | A predicate that is tested to find a valid alternative.

Reviewer: Should we expand this to say that a predicate is something that evaluates to a `BOOLEAN` value (and yes the type value as that contains NULL automatically :D )

| `result`
| This is the expression returned as output if `predicate` evaluates to `true`.

| `default`
| If no match is found, `default` is returned.
|===

[[case-generic-examples]]
=== Example

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (n)
RETURN
CASE
  WHEN n.eyes = 'blue' THEN 1
  WHEN n.age < 40      THEN 2
  ELSE 3
END AS result
----

[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===
| +result+

> | 2

Reviewer: Similar comment to above about making the table easier to relate back by having additional columns

| 1
| 3
| 3
| 1
1+d|Rows: 5
|===

[[expressions-case-null-differentiating]]
== `CASE` with `null` values, and differentiating simple and generic `CASE` forms

The difference between the two `CASE` expressions boils down to what is evaluated first.

> Two queries matching the `age` property of the `Daniel` node (which is `null`) is used to demonstrate the difference.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Two queries matching the `age` property of the `Daniel` node (which is `null`) are used to demonstrate the difference.
```

In a simple `CASE` expression, the `n.age` is evaluated on the third line in the below query.

> For the node `Daniel` it results in `null`, and this will never return `true`, because it is not possible for `null` to match on anything in a graph.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the node `Daniel` it results in `null`, and this will never match a value test, because `null` cannot equal any other value, including `null` itself.
```

Or something similar, the "never return true" isn't quite right, because null isn't returning a value, it is being used as a matcher

> The simple `CASE` expression therefore skips the `WHEN` branch, and goes straight to `ELSE`, where, because `null -10` equals `null`, the resulting age for `Daniel` is `null`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The simple `CASE` expression therefore skips the `WHEN` branch, and goes straight to `ELSE`, where, because `null - 10` equals `null`, the resulting age for `Daniel` from 10 years ago is `null`.
```

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (n)
RETURN n.name,
CASE n.age
  WHEN null THEN -1
  ELSE n.age - 10
END AS age_10_years_ago
----

[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| n.name | age_10_years_ago
| "Alice" | 28
| "Bob" | 15
| "Charlie" | 43
| "Daniel" | null
| "Eskil" | 31
2+d|Rows: 5
|===

The below query is rewritten to use the generic `CASE` form:

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (n)
RETURN n.name,
CASE

>   WHEN null THEN -1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  WHEN n.age IS NULL THEN -1
```

This query doesn't work otherwise because `null` is not a valid predicate expression

  ELSE n.age - 10
END AS age_10_years_ago
----

> In this example, because each row is evaluated individually in the generic `CASE` form, the `WHEN null THEN -1` branch evaluates to `true`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, because each row is evaluated individually in the generic `CASE` form, the `WHEN n.age IS NULL` predicate expression evaluates to `true` for the `Daniel` node, so the result from that branch is returned.
```

> The resulting `age` of `Daniel` is therefore `-1`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The resulting `age_10_years_ago ` of `Daniel` is therefore `-1`. 
```

[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| n.name | age_10_years_ago
| "Alice" | 28
| "Bob" | 15
| "Charlie" | 43
| "Daniel" | -1
| "Eskil" | 31
2+d|Rows: 5
|===

For more information about `null`, see xref:values-and-types/working-with-null.adoc[].

[[expressions-case-succeeding-clauses]]
== `CASE` expressions and succeeding clauses

The results of a `CASE` expression can be used to set properties on a node or relationship.
For example, instead of specifying a node directly, properties can be set for a node selected by a `CASE` expression.

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (n)
WITH n,
CASE n.eyes
  WHEN 'blue'  THEN 1
  WHEN 'brown' THEN 2
  ELSE 3
END AS colourCode

> SET n.colourCode = colourCode

Reviewer: I think we use American English right?

[[case]]
= Conditional expressions (CASE)
:description: This page describes how to use the CASE expression with Cypher.

Generic conditional expressions can be expressed in Cypher using the `CASE` construct.

> Two variants of `CASE` exist within Cypher: the simple form, which allows an expression to be compared against multiple values, and the generic form, which allows multiple conditional statements to be expressed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Two variants of `CASE` exist within Cypher: the _simple_ form, to compare a single expression against multiple values, and the _generic_ form, to express multiple conditional statements.
```

Reviewer 2: A natural question that I have here, that I have never investigated further but to which the answer I think is "no", is: _can I have a subquery as part of a CASE branch?_ I think a clarifying sentence somewhere here in the introduction would be helpful.

[NOTE]
====
`CASE` can only be used as part of xref:clauses/return.adoc[] or xref:clauses/with.adoc[] if you want to use the result in a subsequent clause.
====

[[case-example]]
== Example graph

The following graph is used for the examples below:

image:case_graph.svg[width="500",role="middle"]

To recreate the graph, run the following query against an empty Neo4j database:

[source, cypher, role=test-setup]
----
CREATE
  (alice:Person {name:'Alice', age: 38, eyes: 'brown'}),
  (bob:Person {name: 'Bob', age: 25, eyes: 'blue'}),
  (charlie:Person {name: 'Charlie', age: 53, eyes: 'green'}),
  (daniel:Person {name: 'Daniel', eyes: 'brown'}),
  (eskil:Person {name: 'Eskil', age: 41, eyes: 'blue'}),
  (alice)-[:KNOWS]->(bob),
  (alice)-[:KNOWS]->(charlie),
  (bob)-[:KNOWS]->(daniel),
  (charlie)-[:KNOWS]->(daniel),
  (bob)-[:MARRIED]->(eskil)
----

[[case-simple]]
== Simple `CASE`

> The simple `CASE` form is used to compare an expression against multiple values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The simple `CASE` form is used to compare a single expression against multiple values.
```
I find it helpful to stress the fact that the expression is _one_, while values _multiple_ (especially in comparison with the generic form).

The expressions are evaluated by the `WHEN` operator until a `MATCH` is found.
If no match is found, the expression in the `ELSE` operator is returned.
If there is no `ELSE` case and no match is found, `null` will be returned.

[[case-simple-syntax]]
=== Syntax 

[source, syntax]
----
CASE test
  WHEN value THEN result
  [WHEN ...]
  [ELSE default]
END
----

*Arguments:*

> [options="header"]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[options="header", cols="1,2"]
```
Leaves more room for descriptions in the table. The exact numbers may have to be tuned, haven't checked the result yet.

Author: Looks better 👍

|===
| Name | Description

| `test`

> | A valid expression.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| An expression.
```
If you purposefully enter an _invalid_ one, screw you and your parents.

| `value`
| An expression whose result will be compared to `test`.

| `result`

> | This is the expression returned as output if `value` matches `test`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| The expression to be returned as output if `value` matches `test`.
```

Author: Or just "The expression returned as output..."

| `default`

> | If no match is found, `default` is returned.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| The expression to return if no value matches the test expression.
```

|===

[[case-simple-examples]]
=== Example

[source, cypher]
----

> MATCH (n)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
MATCH (n:Person)
```
Good practice

RETURN
CASE n.eyes
  WHEN 'blue'  THEN 1
  WHEN 'brown' THEN 2
  ELSE 3
END AS result, n.eyes
----

> [role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
```
Otherwise broken table style.

|===
| result | n.eyes
| 2      | "brown"
| 1      | "blue"
| 3      | "green"
| 2      | "brown"
| 1      | "blue"
2+d|Rows: 5
|===

[[case-generic]]
== Generic `CASE`

> The generic `CASE` expression enables the expression of multiple conditional statements.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The generic `CASE` expression supports multiple conditional statements.
```
Also, `expression` is a _very_ loaded term in this page.

Author: How do you mean? Used frequently/carries a lot of weight, or in some way controversial?

Reviewer 2: I mean that in your sentence, `expression` as the 4th word means `Cypher expression` (although I now question whether it's the best wording at all, or if `CASE construct` wouldn't be less ambiguous), while `expression` as 8th word is used in the sense of `to express, communicate`. I'd refrain from using `expression` in any sense other than the first one, in a page on `cypher expressions`.

> Each row is evaluated in order and without any pre-evaluation until a `true` value is found.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each row is evaluated in order until a `true` value is found.
```
It's redundant, or?

If no match is found, the expression in the `ELSE` operator is returned.

> If there is no `ELSE` case and no match is found, `null` will be returned

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If there is no `ELSE` case and no match is found, `null` will be returned.
```

[[case-generic-syntax]]
=== Syntax

[source, syntax]
----
CASE
  WHEN predicate THEN result
  [WHEN ...]
  [ELSE default]
END
----

*Arguments:*

> [options="header"]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[options="header", cols="1,2"]
```
As above.

|===
| Name | Description
| `predicate`
| A predicate is an expression that evaluates to a `BOOLEAN` value.
In this case, the predicate is tested to find a valid alternative.

| `result`

> | This is the expression returned as output if `predicate` evaluates to `true`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| The expression returned as output if `predicate` evaluates to `true`.
```

| `default`

> | If no match is found, `default` is returned.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| The expression to return if no predicate evaluates to `true`.
```

|===

[[case-generic-examples]]
=== Example

[source, cypher]
----

> MATCH (n)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
MATCH (n:Person)
```

RETURN
CASE
  WHEN n.eyes = 'blue' THEN 1
  WHEN n.age < 40      THEN 2
  ELSE 3
END AS result, n.eyes, n.age
----

> [role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="3*<m"]
```
Otherwise broken table style.

|===
| result | n.eyes  | n.age
| 2      | "brown" | 38
| 1      | "blue"  | 25
| 3      | "green" | 53
| 3      | "brown" | null
| 1      | "blue"  | 41

> 1+d|Rows: 5

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3+d|Rows: 5
```

> |===

Reviewer 2: Broken header.

[[expressions-case-null-differentiating]]
== `CASE` with `null` values, and differentiating simple and generic `CASE` forms

> The difference between the two `CASE` expressions boils down to what is evaluated first.

Reviewer 2: Is this accurate? :thinking: @gem-neo4j The examples don't really show this behavior. The difference is what object the `WHEN` operator can take (and in the example, whether `IS :: NULL` is supported or not).

Reviewer: This is one of the differences, I guess it is more to do with the reason why the handling of null is different, more so than why the 2 are generally different

Two queries matching the `age` property of the `Daniel` node (which is `null`) are used to demonstrate the difference.

In a simple `CASE` expression, the `n.age` is evaluated on the third line in the below query.
For the node `Daniel` it results in `null`, and this will never match a value test, because `null` cannot equal any other value (including `null` itself).

> The simple `CASE` expression therefore skips the `WHEN` branch, and goes straight to `ELSE`, where, because `null - 10` equals `null`, the resulting age for `Daniel` ten years ago is `null`.

Reviewer 2: I find these paragraph descriptions hard to follow. I've made an attempt at breaking down the explanation and relating it to individual lines, what's your thoughts?

![Screenshot from 2023-09-19 11-56-15](https://github.com/neo4j/docs-cypher/assets/114478074/bfaab7b5-8b7d-434f-a369-5fbd03086f39)

CASE n.age
  WHEN null THEN -1
  ELSE n.age - 10
END AS age_10_years_ago
----

[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| n.name | age_10_years_ago
| "Alice" | 28
| "Bob" | 15
| "Charlie" | 43
| "Daniel" | null
| "Eskil" | 31
2+d|Rows: 5
|===

The below query is rewritten to use the generic `CASE` form:

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (n)
RETURN n.name,
CASE
  WHEN n.age IS NULL THEN -1
  ELSE n.age - 10
END AS age_10_years_ago
----

In this example, because each row is evaluated individually in the generic `CASE` form, the `WHEN n.age IS NULL` predicate expression evaluates to `true` for the `Daniel` node, and so the result from that branch is returned.
The resulting `age_10_years_ago` of `Daniel` is therefore `-1`. 

[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| n.name | age_10_years_ago
| "Alice" | 28
| "Bob" | 15
| "Charlie" | 43
| "Daniel" | -1
| "Eskil" | 31
2+d|Rows: 5
|===

For more information about `null`, see xref:values-and-types/working-with-null.adoc[].

[[expressions-case-succeeding-clauses]]
== `CASE` expressions and succeeding clauses

The results of a `CASE` expression can be used to set properties on a node or relationship.

> For example, instead of specifying a node directly, properties can be set for a node selected by a `CASE` expression.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand what more information this sentence is trying to convey, but I think the previous sentence + the example afterwards are clear alone, so I'd just remove this sentence.

[source, cypher]
----

> MATCH (n)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
MATCH (n:Person)
```
